Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and Bill Vernon.
People read fantasy or science fiction for a variety of reasons, but first they must develop an interest.
There's a so-called golden age, about 13 or so, when adolescents discover science fiction.
They either read it for a few years, then abandon it, or they develop a lifelong habit of reading it.
The discovery of fantasy for the first time is not as well documented though.
But one route to discovery is a series written by L. Frank Baum about adventures that took place in the wonderful land of Oz.
The first book in the series of 14 written by Baum is still the best known. It's The Wizard of Oz.
The basic theme of this book is well known, even to those unfamiliar with the rest of the Oz stories.
It formed the basis for the 1939 Judy Garland movie, which is shown on television almost yearly.
In The Wizard of Oz, the reader is introduced to Dorothy, a little Kansas girl who has swept by a cyclone to the land of Oz.
There she encounters queer creatures and completes a quest.
But Baum didn't stop with that volume. In subsequent books, Dorothy returns to the land of Oz and has more adventures.
Apparently Baum tired of writing the series because at the end of the sixth book, The Emerald City of Oz,
the readers told that information from Oz was no longer to be had. Oz had been rendered invisible by Glenda the Good.
We talked with Fred Meyer, who was president of the International Wizard of Oz Club and an expert on the series.
We asked him if Baum had been serious when he ended the series temporarily after six novels.
Apparently he was. He felt he had written maybe enough about Oz that he was getting typed as an author.
And while he was very proud to be associated with Oz, he thought it was very successful, he did want to write many other things.
And so he thought that was the best way to end it.
In the forward to the seventh book, The Patchwork Girl of Oz, Baum related that he'd been swayed to write more Oz books by letters from distraught children.
Meyer says that indeed there were a lot of letters written to Baum.
Apparently there were a lot of letters and publishers received letters also.
He did write two other books that weren't about Oz after he wrote the sixth book, and they were not as successful.
And children still asked for more about Oz, so two, three years later he returned to Oz.
The Oz series is written on two levels. There's the innocent fantasy element for children and a goldmine of puns and plays on words for adult readers.
We asked Meyer for whom was Baum aiming when he wrote the series.
Well, he had young sons at the time that he supposedly told the stories to.
And I suppose children become temporary with his own children.
I don't know quite what audience because the books have a wide appeal to people of all ages, but probably he was aiming at children 10, 12, around there.
Although Baum didn't grow wealthy from the Oz books, he was comfortable. Here are Meyer's comments.
Well, he certainly made a living from them. He was able to build a comfortable home in Hollywood after his death. His widow lived in it for the rest of her days.
The house stood, I believe, until about 1954, but it's no longer there now. But anyway, yes, he made a good living from them.
The last of Baum's Oz novels, Glinda of Oz, was published after his death.
Yes, he died in 1919. At the time he died, he had been sick for about a year, year and a half, and he had a couple of manuscripts completed ahead so that they could be published even after he had died.
Baum may even have left a manuscript fragment behind.
That's a tradition that he did, but no one's ever found any. There was one brief little chapter of a book that may have been by him, but some accepted as by him.
I'm inclined to. Others are doubtful of it, really was his. And the reason I'm inclined to accept it is because it was about the Magic Lake, south of the Emerald City.
And Baum had written about almost everything on the Oz map except that. And I don't know how to accept if anyone else would have meant to write about that very lake he hadn't written about before.
More about L. Frank Baum and Oz on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy. And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane. As children, many science fiction and fantasy readers read the Oz books of L. Frank Baum.
Baum wrote 14 novels in the series. After his death, the other authors contributed to the series.
We asked Fred Meyer, president of the International Wizard of Oz Club, to tell us how many other Oz books have been written.
Nowadays there are 40 books in the series, which means there would be 26 in the series after that one. But there are other Oz books besides the ones in the official series.
When we asked Meyer if the Oz books not written by Baum are successful on all levels as Baum's, he allowed that it's a matter of opinion.
Here's where you get into the subjective feelings about them. It's difficult to give a definitive answer on this.
Each author wrote somewhat differently about Oz. As a child, I accepted all of the books and enjoyed them.
But as an adult, I can see differences between the way the authors wrote. There are people who will not read any books except Baum's.
And then there's others that will accept this author, that author, and are choosy that way.
But the authors often wrote just for the children and didn't tend to write on quite so many levels.
Well, there are strange things in the other books by that, I mean on different levels, on the level of meaning and terms of course.
But Baum's seem to be more successful at that than the others were.
Another characteristic of the Oz books, those written by other authors as well as those written by Baum, is the beautiful illustrations by the Imperial Illustrator of Oz, John R. Neill.
Here, Meyer tells us how Neill became the principal illustrator of the series and how later he even wrote some Oz novels.
The publishers asked him to illustrate the second Oz book, and after that, they liked his work and asked him to illustrate the others.
He was a young artist in Philadelphia at the time and illustrated things there, other books even, but he was just starting his career in 1904 when the second Oz book came out.
He became very closely associated with Oz. Many persons think of the characters as he drew them, rather than as any other artist drew them.
And of course eventually he wrote three books as well as illustrated them.
Between 1944 and 1942 he illustrated all of the Oz books that came out, which is quite a span of years.
Meyer is president of the International Wizard of Oz Club. Here he tells us a bit about it.
Well, the club has at different times, between a thousand, two thousand members, and all kinds of people are in the club.
Very young children, adults of many years are in it, and of all kinds of interesting professions are in it.
But we do have in common some affection for Oz or the creation or idea of it.
Many of us are collecting the books, and many just simply want reading copies. Others want to build fine collections.
Some have other interests, such as the 1939 movie and finding all kinds of memorabilia concerning it.
There's all kinds of ways to go to Oz's collection. But we get together and we talk over the books and what we like best.
We have quizzes over the books. We collect the old films.
L. Frank Baum had an Oz film company in 1915, and we collect some of the films made then, 14-15, a film.
It's silent of course, but interesting to see how he thought an Oz film should be made.
And we do all kinds of things. Sing some of the songs from the stage plays.
Discuss how to identify the different editions.
Well, I just generally just, it's a mutual interest organization, and help each other find the books we need.
So fans of the Oz series, those who never lost their love for it, have a club where they can meet others with the same interests.
We'll look at another Oz related novel on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And Bill Vernon.
Many children are exposed through fantasy in the form of Dorothy's adventures in the land of Oz. They're exposed to the books by L. Frank Baum and others and through the famous Judy Garland movie, The Wizard of Oz.
Most children forget Oz as they grow up, but some continue to love it.
Some of these even become members of the International Wizard of Oz Club.
One man who loved Oz as a child, never forgot it, and even wrote a book featuring Oz is science fiction author Philip Jose Farmer.
1982 saw the release of Farmer's book, A Barnstormer in Oz, and hardcovered by Fantasia Press, and later in a trade paperback edition by Berkley.
Here Farmer tells us about his early love for Oz, and why he wrote a book about it.
I've always had a desire since I was young to be a writer and I've always wanted to write an Oz book. I didn't get around to it until I was 64 years old. Of course, the book I would write when I was 64 is quite different from the one I would write when I was 10 or 11.
In A Barnstormer in Oz, Farmer writes about Hank Stover, Dorothy's son, who accidentally enters the land of Oz while flying his World War I vintage biplane in the late 1920s.
Farmer told us a bit about the plot of the book.
If you don't assume that only the first Oz book, The Wonderful Wizard of Oz, is true and that all the rest are fiction and none of them approaches Oz from a science fictional viewpoint. If it did, then you have to explain how Scarecrow could be animated and sentient and talk.
What would happen if animals could talk?
How do you account for the Tin Woodman's piecemeal method of being reconstructed out of tin, and explain magic and all that sort of stuff, just where Oz was?
I had a lot of fun doing it, but I also had to do an awful lot of research, because it took place in 1923, and I had to read all about what was happening in America at that time.
I've been a World War I, an early aviation buff, and I have a considerable library on that, but I still had to look up a lot of things on the jettings, and on the machine guns, and the BARs of that period, and Army organization, politics, and all that sort of thing.
Plus, of course, the agonizing task of being able to explain in a rational manner just how the land of Oz could exist, and how all these beings could exist in it.
By claiming that Baum's first book, The Wizard of Oz, is fact, but that the remaining 40 or so books in the series are fiction, Farmer simplified his writing task. He had another reason for doing this, though.
Baum's books had so many changes and contradictions in them later on that it would be impossible to explain.
Plus the fact that if you are writing an original Oz novel, you can do it without getting permission from the people who own the copyright, because the first two books had gone out of copyright.
I ascertained that before I thought seriously about starting to write on them. I wrote to Riley Company in Chicago, and they told me that I could go ahead and write an Oz novel as long as I did not use any new characters or places in the later books.
That is, those that were written after the first two, if they contained new characters, let's say like the hungry tiger.
More on Philip Jose Farmer and Oz on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon.
And Daryl Lane.
Science Fiction author Philip Jose Farmer recently published an Oz novel called A Barnstormer in Oz.
His premise is that the first book in the Oz series, The Wizard of Oz, is fact, but all the remaining books are fantasy.
We asked Farmer for what audience he was aiming when he wrote A Barnstormer in Oz.
Science fiction audience.
Although, of course, there are a lot of people who don't read much science fiction, they're still like Oz.
But primarily, I think I was writing it for myself.
I mean, you know, you get down to the bottom of it.
Because I've always loved Oz, and I always wanted to write in Oz, but I finally did it.
Readers may be surprised to learn the inspirations for two of the characters, Sharts the Shirtless and Blogo, the Rare Beast.
There's a character in there called Sharts the Shirtless.
And he actually is a sort of a wild Doc Savage.
Yep, if you were acquainted with the first Doc Savage magazine that came out, you will see the shirt is torn to shreds.
And when the 1965 reissues by Bantam came out, the artist, what was his name?
I can't remember it right off, off right hand.
But anyway, he continued that torn shirt motif.
So Sharts the Shirtless is sort of an Ozian takeoff from Doc Savage.
Plus the fact that his companion, the Rare Beast, Blogo, is sort of a takeoff from Doc Savage's apey buddy, Monk Mayfair.
It doesn't matter to the reader whether he knows that or not, but if he does know it, it might add a little extra flavor.
By making A Barnstormer in Oz science fiction, Farmer had to explain in rational terms some of the elements peculiar to Oz, talking animals for instance.
Scarecrow's instead of being set up to scare away the crows are set up there to advertise the fact that there was food growing there for them.
Well that's the only way it could be.
If crows, as the intelligence of human beings, can talk with them, they're not going to be fooled one minute by Scarecrow, right?
But Dorothy had assumed because of her short stay there that scarecrows were up there for the purpose they were set up for on Earth.
Well I figured out otherwise.
In one scene early in the book, the US Army attempts to send an airplane into Oz's airspace, but the plane crashes and the pilot is killed.
The hero, Hank Stover, and the reader, we hasten to add, finds the barbaric burial scene shocking.
It is an unexpected dimension in the seemingly innocuous land of Oz. We asked Farmer about this scene.
Oz is not a manby-pamby land. It's a real inhabited by real people even if they're very short people.
And if you have people who are descended from the ancient Goths who intermingled the Neanderthals originally, then you're not going to have a society quite like the medieval societies of Earth.
There would be a lot of customs that would be different.
And like all societies, even Oz society, has its sinister aspects, its frightening aspects, its alien aspects.
More on Oz on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy. And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And Bill Vernon. People have been hearing about the wonderful land of Oz for over 80 years.
It made its first appearance in L. Frank Baum's classic The Wizard of Oz, which came out in 1900.
Why has the series been so popular, particularly the first book, The Wizard of Oz?
We asked Fred Meyer, president of the International Wizard of Oz Club, why he thinks Oz has retained its popularity.
I guess the idea of a little girl seeking home strikes a responsive chord to some people. And of course the search for wisdom, courage, and kindness are certain noble ideals.
And a humbug wizard and so on also was attractive. But there's just something about them that strikes a certain response to some kind of people.
And it's difficult to explain what it is. As a matter of fact, if you ask six different people, you probably get six different answers.
Different ones will not even agree on which books they would prefer, of the ones they've read.
It much depends on the circumstances under which you read the book, I suppose.
We also asked Philip Jose Farmer, a longtime Oz fan and author of A Barnstormer in Oz.
Of course there were many books written back in 1900 and afterwards about foreign lands or fairy lands.
But what Baum did was to create a magnificent quest.
And what you have Dorothy looking for a way of getting home, the Cowardly Lion wanting courage, Tin Woodman wanting a heart, and Scarecrow wanting brains.
Now the thing is they all thought the wonderful wizard of Oz could give it to them.
Well, he told him they would, but he put him through a series of trials.
You know, first they had to go out and kill the Wicked Witch of the West.
And I forget offhand what the other quest was.
But the point was that they had all these qualities that they wanted.
The Scarecrow was ignorant, but he was intelligent.
Tin Woodman had a very tender heart, even if he didn't have a heart inside that timber.
And the Cowardly Lion was like all of us.
He'd get scared, but he was able to overcome his fear.
But they needed some magical reassurance.
And finally when they exposed the Wizard of Oz as a humbug, he still concocted physical devices, which were symbols of what they wanted.
You know, he had the Cowardly Lion drink a pot of courage.
Somebody had suggested he probably had that courage.
Then he made a heart out of velvet filled with sawdust and put it inside the Tin Woodman's body.
And he stuck... oh, okay.
He put bran inside the Scarecrow's head and then he put needles in him.
And he said his head was brand new now and sharp, needle sharp of course.
And that was pretty fun.
And having these physical evidences of things they wanted, they could seem to be very happy, although they'd have these qualities all this time.
And I think that moral there, plus the wonderful quest in bound book form,
is something that appealed to the heart of all the kids and the heart of adults too.
The Oz series, delightful fantasy for children, clever invention for adults.
It seems that these timeless books will be around for a long time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.